---
title:  "RabbitMQ"
categories: 
    - Technology
header:
    image: /images/2019-10-07-rabbitmq/rabbitmq-logo.png
---

## Definition
> [RabbitMQ](https://www.rabbitmq.com/install-debian.html#apt) is the most widely deployed open source message broker.

Có thể coi RabbitMQ như là bưu điện, nơi nhận và chuyển phát thư.

- A producer is a user application that sends messages.
- A queue is a buffer that stores messages.
- A consumer is a user application that receives messages.

RabbitMQ speaks multiple protocols. Pika is the Python client recommended by the RabbitMQ team.

## Hello World Example
Assume: RabbitMQ is installed and running on localhost on standard port (5672).


- Step 1: Establish connection
- Step 2: Create a queue, if we send a message to non-existing location, RabbitMQ will just drop the message.

In RabbitMQ, a message can never be sent directly to the queue, it always needs to go through an *exchange*.

Receiving messages from the queue is more complex. It works by subscribing a **callback** function to a queue. Whenever we receive a message, this **callback** function is called by the Pika library

## Task Queue Example
The main idea behind Work Queues is to avoid doing a resource-intensive task immediately and having to wait for it to complete. Instend we schedule the task to be done later.

We ecapsulate a task as a message and send it to the queue. A worker process running in the background will pop the tasks and eventually execute the job.

By default, RabbitMQ will send each message to the next consumer, in sequence. On average every consumer will get the same number of messages. This way of distributing messages is called *round-robin*. Try this out with three or more workers.

If a worker dies, the task will also dies. We don't want to lose any tasks. -> **message acknowledgements**. An ack is sent back by the consumer to tell RabiitMQ that a particular message had been received, processed and that RabittMQ is free to delete it.

There aren't any message timeouts; RabbitMQ will redeliver the message when the consumer dies. It's fine even if processing a message takes a very, very long time.

If you forget to add the `basic_ack`, RabbitMQ will eat more and more memory as it won't be able to release any unacked messages.

### Message Durability
When RabbitMQ quits or crashes it will forget the queues and messages unless you tell it not to. Two things are required to make sure that messages aren't lost: we need to mark both the queue and messages as durable.

RabbitMQ doesn't allow you to redefine an existing queue with different parameters and will return an error to any program that tries to do that.

### Message Persistence
Marking messages as persistent doesn't fully guarantee that a message won't be lost. Although it tells RabbitMQ to save the message to disk, there is still a short time window when RabbitMQ has accepted a message and hasn't saved it yet. -> **publisher confirms** for stronger guarantee.

### Fair dispatch
RabbitMQ just dispatches a message when the message enters the queue. It doesn't look at the number of unacknowledged messages for a consumer. It just blindy dispatches every n-th messages to the n-th consumer.

-> use `basis.qos` meothd with the `prefetch_count=1` setting. This tells RabbitMQ not to give more than one message to a worker at a time. Or, in other words, don't dispatch a new message to a worker until it has processed and acknowledged the previous one. Instead, it will dispatch it to the next worker that is not still busy.


## Publish/Subscribe
Deliver a message to multiple consumers.

An exchange must know exactly what to do with a message it receives. Should it be appended to a particular queue? Should it be appended to many queues? Or should it get discarded. The rules for that are defiend by the *exchange type*.

Exchange types:
- `direct`
- `topic`
- `headers`
- `fanout`: broadcasts all the messages it receives to all the queues it knows.

*nameless* exchange: messages are routed to the queue with the name specified by `routing_key`.


Firstly, whenever we connect to Rabbit we need a fresh, empty queue. To do it we could create a queue with a random name, or, even better - let the server choose a random queue name for us. We can do this by supplying empty queue parameter to queue_declare:

Secondly, once the consumer connection is closed, the queue should be deleted. There's an exclusive flag for that: