---
title: Django
toc: true
categories:
    - Technology
tags:
    - framework
---

# I. Django's Core Features

- A website is a resource stored on a server. User send HTTP Request and the website sends back a HTTP Response.

- A webpage is a discrete entity that contains data. Each webpage is identified by URL.

- *Dynamic webpage* typically refer to a webpage that is computed on the backend.

- Frameworks are different from other external codebases, such as libraries, because they feature **inversion of control**. In this way, the framework, not the developer, dictates control flow.

```python
# Using a library
def my_func(*args):
    ...
    library.lib_func(*args)
    ...

# Using a framework
def my_func():
    ...
framework.run(my_func)
```

### Django Framework
**Django**:
- free and open-source
- MVC architecture

In Django, a view refers to something that builds a webpage and is part of the implementation of MVC controllers. The Model itself does not store data but provide tools to communicate with databases.



## Create a new Project
```
django-admin startproject projectname
```

Django Project structure:
- manage.py: provide util functions.
- projectname/: contains porject-wide settings.


Django requires a database before it can run.
```
./manage.py migrate
```

```
./manage.py runserver [optional port]

# to make it publicly available
./manage.py runserver 0.0.0.0:80
```



### Create a new app
```
./manage.py startapp appname
```

A project is made of any number of apps.
Django encapsulates data and behavior by app.



Django's app file structure:
- appname/migrations/: contains data pertaining to the database tables.

Connect our new apps to our project by editting `settings.py`. add app's name to `INSTALLED_APPS`.

Webpage data are typically stored in the `views.py` file of any app.

To delete the app we need to remove it from `settings.py` and `urls.py`. Then remove the directory of the app. `rm -r app/`. Every thing is easy thank to clean app encapsulation.

## Programming Django Models and Creating a SQLite Database.
Database is a undeniable part of modern websites.
Advantages:
- Rapid access to consistent, persistent, normalized data

Using slug allows for the customizable creation of clean and human-friendly URLs.


one-to-many relation
many-to-many relation

You should always use Django to build your database. YOu will always want to define models in Django and then make Django generate the database for you.

In Django, models and the database schema are reflections of one other. Any modification of one must result in the modification of the other.

Migrations solve the conflict problems by providing a controlled, predictable system for altering a database. The typical workflow with Django is to:
1. Create or change a model in Django
2. Generate a migration file
3. Use the migration file to create/alter the database.


Migration files may be considerd version control for the database.

```
./manage.py check
```


Với Django, cách tốt nhất để accept input from user đó là sử dụng form. Việc hiểu cách hoạt động của form và sử dụng chúng là cực kì cần thiết khi học Django.

## HTML Forms
GET và POST là 2 method duy nhất khi làm việc với forms

Với POST thì sẽ gửi lên form data. Phía server đọc trong request.POST.
Ngược lại, với GET thì sẽ format data dưới dạng string rồi append vào trong url -> query parameters.

Thế nên những form quan trọng, như bao gồm password không được sử dụng GET. Chỉ sử dụng GET để search, vì lệnh GET lưu params ngay trong url thế nên có thể dễ dàng share cho người khác.

Django forms xử lý 3 vấn đề chính:
- preparing and restructuring data to make it ready for rendering
- creating HTML forms for the data
- receiving and processing submitted forms and data from the client.


Ví dụ form đơn giản:
```python
from django import forms

class NameForm(forms.Form):
    your_name = forms.CharField(label='Your name', max_length=100)
```

Options:
- max_length: thêm vào luôn html -> validate ngay ở template và trong backend.

Nếu form `is_valid()` thì có thể access `form.cleaned_data`

### Initial populating on Django forms
```python
data={'username': user.username}
form = UserForm(initial=data)
```

## User Authentication

Django đi kèm theo hệ thống User riêng, nếu chỉ dùng cho các ứng dụng dạng microservice và cấp API ra ngoài thì hoàn toàn OK. Cơ mà nếu dùng làm backend cho các hệ thống "hoàn chỉnh" hơn, yêu cầu authentication thuận tiện hơn (nhất là đăng nhập bằng email) thì nên tạo custom user, và nên tạo từ ngay khi tạo project luôn, vì quá trình migrate sang nó không có dễ...


## References
- [https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/3.1/topics/forms/](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/3.1/topics/forms/)